Let Agent be run in a Temporal workflow by moving model requests, tool calls, and MCP to Temporal activities (#2225)
pydantic/pydantic-ai: docs/temporal.md

The integration only uses Pydantic AI's public interface, so it can also serve as a reference for how to integrate with another durable execution systems.

### Durable Execution

In Temporal's durable execution implementation, a program that crashes or encounters an exception while interacting with a model or API will retry until it can successfully complete.

Temporal relies primarily on a replay mechanism to recover from failures.
As the program makes progress, Temporal saves key inputs and decisions, allowing a re-started program to pick up right where it left off.

The key to making this work is to separate the applications repeatable (deterministic) and non-repeatable (non-deterministic) parts:

1. Deterministic pieces, termed [**workflows**](https://docs.temporal.io/workflow-definition), execute the same way when re-run with the same inputs.
2. Non-deterministic pieces, termed [**activities**](https://docs.temporal.io/activities), can run arbitrary code, performing I/O and any other operations.

> Workflow code can run for extended periods and, if interrupted, resume exactly where it left off.

Reviewer: I don't think you explicitly mention anywhere that workflows cannot incorporate I/O. This might be implicit in saying "deterministic" but I feel like when most people read "deterministic" they think non-random, rather than not-including-I/O. I think it's worth making the point explicitly:
```suggestion
Workflow code can run for extended periods and, if interrupted, resume exactly where it left off. Critically, workflow code _cannot_ include any kind of I/O, over network, terminal, etc.
```
or similar

> Activity code faces no restrictions on I/O or external interactions, but if it fails part-way through it restarts from the beginning.

Reviewer: > it restarts from the beginning.
This feels a bit ambiguous if you don't understand what an activity is.

I think it's maybe worth explaining something like — "if you are familiar with distributed execution frameworks like celery, you can think of calling activity code like executing a celery task, except where you wait for the response and continue executing once it is received". (You can add caveats about how this isn't a perfect analogy or whatever, but I think it would help people unfamiliar with temporal understand what was going on.)

          v           v                v
      [External APIs, services, databases, etc.]
```

See the [Temporal documentation](https://docs.temporal.io/evaluate/understanding-temporal#temporal-application-the-building-blocks)  for more information.

## Durable Agent

Any agent can be wrapped in a [`TemporalAgent`][pydantic_ai.durable_exec.temporal.TemporalAgent] to get a durable agent that can be used inside a deterministic Temporal workflow, by automatically offloading all work that requires IO (namely model requests, tool calls, and MCP server communication) to non-deterministic activities.

At the time of wrapping, the agent's [model](models/index.md) and [toolsets](toolsets.md) (including function tools registered on the agent and MCP servers) are frozen, activities are dynamically created for each, and the original model and toolsets are wrapped to call on the worker to execute the corresponding activity instead of directly performing the action inside the workflow. The original agent can still be used as normal outside of the Temporal workflow, but any changes to its model or toolsets after wrapping will not be reflected in the durable agent.

> This is a simple but complete example of wrapping an agent for durable execution, creating a Temporal workflow with durable execution logic, connecting to a Temporal server, and running the workflow from non-durable code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Simple example

Here is a simple but complete example of wrapping an agent for durable execution, creating a Temporal workflow with durable execution logic, connecting to a Temporal server, and running the workflow from non-durable code.
```
Feels like it's worth a bit heavior of a markdown transition here.

> All it requires is a Temporal server to be [running locally](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal#download-and-start-temporal-server-locally):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All it requires is the Temporal dev server to be [running locally](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal#download-and-start-temporal-server-locally) on the default port:
```

            id=f'geography-{uuid.uuid4()}',
            task_queue='geography',
        )
        print(output)
        #> Mexico City (Ciudad de México, CDMX)
```

1. The original `Agent` cannot be used inside a deterministic Temporal workflow, but the `TemporalAgent` can.
2. As explained above, the workflow represents a deterministic piece of code that can use non-deterministic activities for operations that require IO.
3. [`TemporalAgent.run()`][pydantic_ai.durable_exec.temporal.TemporalAgent.run] works just like [`Agent.run()`][pydantic_ai.Agent.run], but it will automatically offload model requests, tool calls, and MCP server communication to Temporal activities.
4. We connect to the Temporal server which keeps track of workflow and activity execution.
5. This assumes the Temporal server is [running locally](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal#download-and-start-temporal-server-locally).
6. The [`PydanticAIPlugin`][pydantic_ai.durable_exec.temporal.PydanticAIPlugin] tells Temporal to use Pydantic for serialization and deserialization, and to treat [`UserError`][pydantic_ai.exceptions.UserError] exceptions as non-retryable.

> 7. We start the worker process that will listen on the specified task queue and run workflows and activities.

Reviewer: Is this really a worker _process_? If it's not a distinct process, but just something else running on the same async event loop, I'd probably drop the word process here.

Separately, I would add here that in a production deployment, you would typically run the worker in a different code path than you'd use to execute a workflow. Basically just more clearly making the point that this structure is designed for making the example convenient to run and not what "real world" temporal code would look like.

8. The [`AgentPlugin`][pydantic_ai.durable_exec.temporal.AgentPlugin] registers the `TemporalAgent`'s activities with the worker.
9. We call on the server to execute the workflow on a worker that's listening on the specified task queue.
10. The agent's `name` is used to uniquely identify its activities.

> _(This example is complete, it can be run "as is" — you'll need to add `asyncio.run(main())` to run `main`)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_(This example is complete, it can be run "as is" — you just need to add `asyncio.run(main())` to run `main`)_
```
if we are already using the existing phrasing elsewhere its' fine.

In a real world application, the agent, workflow, and worker are typically defined separately from the code that calls for a workflow to be executed.
Because Temporal workflows need to be defined at the top level of the file and the `TemporalAgent` instance is needed inside the workflow and when starting the worker (to register the activities), it needs to be defined at the top level of the file as well.

> For more information on how to use Temporal in Python applications, see their [Python SDK guide](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that temporal workflows are useful for more than just handling failures, including .... For more information on how to use Temporal in Python applications, see their [Python SDK guide](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python).
```
(the "..." here might talk about how you can use signals to achieve human-in-the-loop, how you can "sleep" for days without a problem, etc., I just think it's worth pointing out that temporal is more than just error handling, and helps motivate why someone might want to read more. Sorry I didn't flesh it out for you, maybe AI can help lol.)

> ## Agent and Toolset Requirements

Reviewer: I think we should convert this and the next 3 sections into subsections of a parent section called something like "Requirements on durable agent usage" or similar, and drop the point about "Other than that, any agent ... will just work!", given it's actually three caveats here. But for the most part I think these sections can stay the same.

To ensure that Temporal knows what code to run when an activity fails or is interrupted and then restarted, even if your code is changed in between, each activity needs to have a name that's stable and unique.

When `TemporalAgent` dynamically creates activities for the wrapped agent's model requests and toolsets (specifically those that implement their own tool listing and calling, i.e. [`FunctionToolset`][pydantic_ai.toolsets.FunctionToolset] and [`MCPServer`][pydantic_ai.mcp.MCPServer]), their names are derived from the agent's [`name`][pydantic_ai.agent.AbstractAgent.name] and the toolsets' [`id`s][pydantic_ai.toolsets.AbstractToolset.id]. These fields are normally optional, but are required to be set when using Temporal. They should not be changed once the temporal agent has been deployed to production as this would break active workflows.

> Other than that, any agent and toolset will just work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than that, using any agent and toolset with `TemporalAgent` should "just work"!
```

> ## Agent Run Dependencies

Reviewer: I think we should really try to reduce this boilerplate for users if at all possible. We can come back to it after merging if necessary, but it feels to me like it may be possible to do this more automatically and/or at least make it error at activity-creation time rather than at activity-run time (when you access non-serialized fields).
